President Cyril Ramaphosa recently laid out an Energy Response Plan (ERP), in a bid to fix the country’s electricity crisis. Loadshedding is continuing and threatening the country’s energy security. Although the ERP was laid out, Eskom is struggling to meet its short term targets and the DA has asked the Public Enterprises Committee to step in and hold the Executive to account and bring the ERP back on track, according to DA Shadow Minister of Public Enterprises, Ghaleb Cachalia, MP. “I have today written to the Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Committee, Khayalethu Magaxa, requesting that he calls on the Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, and Eskom CEO, Andre Ruyter, to explain the delays in fixing Eskom’s installed generation capacity and the hiring of retired Eskom engineers,” said Ghaleb Cachalia MP on Thursday. In the short term, and based on President Ramaphosa’s energy plan, specific interventions were laid out to help fill the electricity supply gap: “Not only is Eskom nowhere near to meeting these targets, but the entire ERP now faces the real prospect of permanent derailment due to an ineffective National Energy Crisis Committee (NECOM) which appears to have faded away” says Mr Cachalia. Successive Eskom notices announcing loadshedding have shown that generation units have continued to trip across Eskom’s generation fleet, from Camden, Medupi, Grootvlei, Hendrina, Majuba and Arnot power stations. Mr Cachalia stated that this either confirms that Eskom’s maintenance plan is falling apart or the delay in re-hiring former experienced engineers is impacting maintenance plans negatively. “The state of affairs is hardly surprising. The DA’s Energy Response Plan Implementation Tracker, which was launched last week, revealed that out of the 29 energy plan project goals being tracked, 20 of these (or 70%) are still yet to move beyond rhetoric or the conceptualisation stage” says Mr Cachalia. “The silence by the Speaker of Parliament, Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, on the DA request to set up an Ad-hoc committee to monitor NECOM, will not stop the DA from using other parliamentary avenues to hold the executive to account over the ERP. The portfolio committee has an obligation to step in and demand answers on why the government is moving slowly on measures taken to improve Eskom’s operational performance” added Mr Cachalia.