With unemployment continuing to be the number one issue facing young people, Cape Town students got together to help inspire the next generation of entrepreneurs. On Friday the 12th of August 2022, University of Cape Town (UCT) student societies hosted a business lunch sponsored by Genera Capital, for those interested in entrepreneurship and business. This initiative was organised by the Investment Society and the South African Union of Jewish Students (SAUJS) on campus. The topic “Are business and entrepreneurship the future for our new varsity graduates?” was introduced in order to open up a conversation and bring about clarity for students who might want to establish a business or become entrepreneurs. The event was held at the UCT Kaplan Centre and was well attended and enjoyed. The event hosted two inspiring guest speakers, Sivu Nobongoza and Mandla Mapondera. Sivu Nobongoza, of ‘Freedom Friends Marketing and Events’, is a Cape Town based marketer and seasonal tastemaker with over two decades of experience in top marketing, advertising and film agencies in South Africa. Sivu took the decision to leave the nest and fly out on his own. Under his current portfolio, he sports the title of ‘founder and owner’ of Freedom Friends Marketing and Events. He is the co-owner and operations director of YOBO Whisky & Wine Bar, and the ‘copy and content king’ for Yobo Design – a textile design and branding agency. Mandla Mapondera spent time working as an independent investment analyst, with a focus on financial modelling and research. He works with start-ups as a financial adviser and/or outsourced financial manager. Part of this work includes facilitating workshops for entrepreneurs on fiscal management, investment readiness and fundraising, and related topics. The students expressed interest in having more speakers on such topics, highlighting the importance and need for campus organisations to be the conduits for bringing in empowering and motivational speakers. Jonathan Levi, representing Genera Capital, finished off the event with a vote of thanks to the talented speakers. He further explained the work of Genera Capital, and offered an open-door policy to the students should they wish to reach out. The organisers of the event said they hope for more dialogue around the topic of entrepreneurship, as this would encourage young people to learn from others’ hurdles and experiences, which would help guide the up-and-coming entrepreneurs as they make their way through their enterprising journey.