Last week, hundreds of pastors gathered outside the Israeli Embassy in Pretoria in order to launch the ‘Tshwane-Jerusalem Declaration’ and offer prayers for the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO) and its minister, Naledi Pandor. These prayers, they stated, were an act of encouragement for South Africa to support peace in the Middle East. Various organisations and ministries under the banner of the South African Friends of Israel (SAFI) were in attendance, including PJTN (Proclaiming Justice to the Nations), AACUM (Active African Christians United Movement), and Healing the Nation, which represent hundreds of thousands of Christian members in support of the State of Israel. The crowd proudly waved Israeli and South African flags as they danced and sang. Messiah Boat Ministries initiated the prayer vigil, Pastor Israel Molefe was the MC, supported by other pastors and bishops as they recited psalms and prayer. Over 80% of South Africa’s estimated population of 60 million, is Christian. At least 15% identify as Zionist Christians – with 11% belonging to the Zion Christian Church, and another 4.2% falling under “Other Zionist churches” (2016 Community Survey – Statistics SA). This means that at least 9 million people see Israel as their religious homeland, Jerusalem as their Christian capital, and Jews as the ‘Chosen People’.  They stand with Israel and not with the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement and their supporters, despite what the government tells you. Historically, this has been shown to be true. In 2018, literally thousands of Zionist Christians marched in solidarity with Israel, from the Tshwane art Museum to the Union Building Gardens, and handed over a referendum to the ANC government. This referendum requested that there be no cutting ties with the Jewish State, no downgrade of the embassy and insisted on the return of the South African ambassador to Israel. More than 40,000 people had signed that petition. Despite all of this, Minister Naledi Pandor recently donned a Keffiyeh and made an impassioned speech demanding a UN committee on apartheid be formed to investigate allegations of apartheid against Israel. It would appear that South Africans, as a nation, do not agree. The South African government’s declarations against the State of Israel seem to have more to do with politics than with listening to their own people. Indeed, the electricity crisis, poverty crisis, youth unemployment crisis, water crisis amongst others, show this. The government does not take the will of the people into account. Prayers for peace and unity, prayers for freedom for all, are always welcome and are a good sign that there is connection and genuine care for the people who suffer when there is conflict. This is the spirit of the South African people. During the prayer vigil, SAFI General Manager, Pamela Ngubane, together with SAFI spokesperson, Bafana Modise, highlighted the importance of mass prayer for South Africa to turn away from its foreign policy which does not serve the interests of peace or the South African people. They stated that the South African government repeatedly endorses hostile statements against Israel, even against Israel’s peace and engagement efforts on the African continent. “Now is the time for all to stand proud of the Holy Land, and all it has to offer South Africa, and South Africans” they stated. Following their speech, the Tshwane-Jerusalem Declaration for Harmonious Relations between South Africa and Israel was launched. This declaration is one of support for improved relations between South Africa and Israel. Israeli Ambassador to South Africa, His Excellency, Eli Belotsercovksy, shared his message of acceptance as he was handed the Tshwane-Jerusalem Declaration. This launch of the Tshwane-Jerusalem Declaration is the start of rolling prayer rallies from church groups and civil society organisations around the country and will culminate in a mass prayer rally in Johannesburg in November. First published here.